A
N
D
Y
 
W
E
S
T
AND THE ART OF LIVING
LIONEL
MESSI
Contents
Acknowledgements 
 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   7
Introduction   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 8
The Price of Success   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  15
Learning to Lose   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  45
The Brain Game  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  74
Strenuous Freedom 
 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   105
The Reciprocal Altruist   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 133
A Different River  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   161
A Better Life   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   190
Epilogue 
 .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  219
Bibliography  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .222
15
Chapter One
The Price of Success
Argentina 2-1 Brazil
FIFA World Youth Championship semi-final
Tuesday 28 June 2005, Galgenwaard Stadion, Utrecht
It is the summer of 2005, and the most talented young 
footballers on the planet have spent the last few weeks gathered 
in the Netherlands with dreams of winning the sport’s 
most prestigious junior tournament: the FIFA World Youth 
Championship.
After 36 games of intense competition, they have been 
whittled down to just four remaining teams – and one of 
the semi-finals is being contested between South American 
neighbours Argentina and Brazil, the protagonists of perhaps 
international football’s most famous and heated rivalry, whose 
brightest emerging stars are now going head to head for a place 
in the final.
With just six minutes played, the ball is passed to Argentina’s 
diminutive number 18, who receives possession slightly right of 
centre, around 30 yards from goal. His name, the whole world 
will soon know, is Lionel Messi.
An attacking player for Spanish club FC Barcelona with a 
handful of first-team appearances already under his belt, Messi 
controls adroitly and looks up. Seeing space to run into, he cuts 
inside and dribbles towards the penalty area, always keeping 
the ball on his favoured left foot. 
Two, three, four little touches, using his body to shield the 
ball away from the Brazilian defender who is trying to close him 
down. Then, with the opposition players tracking back towards 
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
16
their own goal to cover the danger, Messi decides to shoot. From 
25 yards, he lets fly. The connection is sugar sweet and the ball 
rockets, without a trace of swerve or dip, straight into the top 
right corner, leaving Brazilian goalkeeper and captain Renan 
groping hopelessly at thin air.
‘Look at where he’s put that ball!’ gushes the Argentine 
television commentator in admiring tones. ‘Unstoppable for 
all the goalkeepers in Brazil’s history!’
It is certainly a sensational strike, even drawing applause from 
some of the Brazilian fans inside the stadium in Utrecht. But it is 
not enough to seal victory and progression to the final, because 
Brazil bounce back to level the game with 15 minutes remain­
ing 
through a set-piece header from midfielder Renato. 1-1.
With the clock winding down, extra time is looking 
inevitable. Deep inside stoppage time, however, Argentina 
have one more chance to attack as the ball goes out of play 
for a throw-in, midway inside Brazil’s half. Swiftly, midfielder 
Neri Cardozo gathers the ball on the left touchline and hurls it 
down the line into the path of Messi, who has already started 
his run into space. 
Messi gathers the ball on the left flank, level with the edge 
of the box. He drives towards goal, drops his shoulder to beat 
a challenge, reaches the byline and cuts back a low cross to 
the near post. Argentina’s substitute striker Sergio Aguero 
can’t connect cleanly, but the loose ball drops obligingly to the 
team’s captain, Pablo Zabaleta, who twists to shoot and sees a 
deflection wrong-foot Renan, sending the ball bouncing into 
the back of the net. 
Victory for Argentina, and a place in the final! And Messi, 
with a brilliant goal and an assist, is again the hero, just as he 
had been three days earlier – the day after his 18th birthday – 
in the quarter-final against a Spain team featuring his former 
Barcelona youth team-mate Cesc Fabregas and future full 
internationals David Silva, Juanfran and Fernando Llorente. 
In that last-eight encounter, with the game tied at one 
apiece midway through the second half, Messi had delivered 
a delicately weighted pass to break open the Spanish defence 
and release Gustavo Oberman, who finished well to make it 
2-1. Two minutes later, Messi completed the job himself with a 
17
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
superb solo strike, receiving the ball on the edge of the penalty 
area and taking two deft touches to create space for a low shot 
which he dispatched clinically into the far corner.
Even now, though, with Spain and Brazil both defeated and 
a place in the final assured, there is still work to be done before 
Argentina can be crowned world youth champions. Next, they 
have to play Nigeria in the final.
Messi, as Argentina’s star turn and most in-form player, 
will inevitably be at the heart of the Albiceleste’s efforts in the 
title decider against a Nigeria team which overcame Morocco 
and hosts the Netherlands to reach the final – and as soon as 
the game starts he’s in the thick of the action, snapping into a 
challenge to win the ball and spark his team’s first attack after 
just 15 seconds.
Predictably, Messi is the central character when the scoring 
is opened towards the end of the first half. Argentina launch 
a counter-attack and Messi receives possession on the halfway 
line, turning sharply to dribble past one defender, then another, 
and then advancing into the box before being felled by a reckless 
challenge from Nigeria centre-back Dele Adeleye. It’s a clear 
penalty, and Messi picks himself up to convert from the spot, 
coolly sending goalkeeper Ambruse Vanzekin the wrong way.
But Nigeria fight back, levelling the game early in the 
second half, and tension rises as the game ticks into its final 
quarter. Then, with 20 minutes to play, comes the next big 
moment: Aguero breaks into the area from the right and is 
clumsily fouled by opposing full-back Monday James, giving 
referee Terje Hauge an easy decision: another penalty. 
After a long delay during Nigerian protestations, Messi 
again steps up to take his second spot-kick of the game. And 
again his aim is true, as he slides the ball into the bottom right 
corner while Vanzekin dives to the left. 2-1 to Argentina. 
This time there’s no way back for the African team, and 
20 minutes later the final whistle is blown: Argentina are the 
world champions, and 18-year-old Lionel Messi is the hero. Two 
goals in the final, a goal and an assist apiece in the semi- and 
quarter-finals, and individual awards for the best player and 
leading scorer of the tournament.
Superstardom beckons!
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
18
Chasing the dream
Lionel Messi’s soaring success as a teenager with his national 
under-20 team that summer in the Netherlands, which he 
described at the time as the best moment of his life, can be 
seen as a reward for all the effort he had exerted to get that 
far. A pat on the back from the gods of football for a job well 
done, and a tantalising promise that even more exciting and 
rewarding glories would be forthcoming if he could stay on 
his current path.
That path, though, had not been an easy one for Messi 
to tread.
The story of his childhood is already well known. But it is 
worth recapping again here, to provide some context for the 
journey this precocious talent had to travel before he could hold 
aloft the world’s most prestigious trophy in youth football that 
sunny summer day in 2005.
As a young boy growing up in a middle-class family in Rosario, 
a medium-sized city in central Argentina, Lionel Messi (born on 
24 June 1987) was like many others of his age: obsessed with 
football, always with a ball at his feet, and spending every spare 
second out on the street or in the city’s parks playing games with 
his cousins and older brothers – Rodrigo and Matias – or with the 
local club side, Grandoli, who he started to represent at the age of 
five before then joining the youth ranks of one of the city’s top-
flight clubs, Newell’s Old Boys.
His parents, Jorge and Celia, were happy to support their 
sons’ shared infatuation with the round ball, and when they 
were unable to make the journeys to drop off and collect little 
Leo, Rodrigo and Matias, their much-cherished maternal 
grandmother – also named Celia – would always step in to ensure 
the boys could train and play, giving them endless supplies of 
moral and emotional encouragement every step of the way.
All of this is perfectly commonplace. Nothing unusual so 
far. Boys who love football, show some talent for the game and 
enjoy the support of a doting grandparent – we’ve heard this 
one before. 
But the story for Lionel, who had always been very small, 
took a sharp deviation away from the norm at the age of ten, 
when he was diagnosed with a growth deficiency which could 
19
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
only be treated by the daily injection of hormones. And that 
treatment was going to be very expensive – around £1,000 a 
month, more than half of his father Jorge’s salary.
Without the treatment, he would continue to grow at an 
abnormally slow rate, which would also inevitably slow his 
progress on the football field, allowing opposition players to 
easily brush him off the ball as they grew into tall and strong 
teenagers while he remained underdeveloped. If Leo’s dreams 
of becoming a top-level professional footballer were to be 
maintained, there was no option: he needed those injections, 
plain and simple.
Initially, Jorge’s social security benefits were able to cover 
the cost. And for two years, Lionel personally undertook the 
task himself, uncomplainingly injecting himself every single 
day without fail, alternating on a daily basis from left leg to right 
before he went to bed at night. 
When he was 12, though, problems ensued because the 
state welfare system would no longer pay for the treatment. 
Jorge approached Leo’s club, Newell’s, who made encouraging 
initial noises but then failed to be forthcoming with the cash. 
So Lionel travelled 200 miles from his home town of Rosario to 
the country’s capital, Buenos Aires, for a trial with Argentina’s 
most successful club, River Plate. They were impressed, but not 
enough to invest so much money in a player so young. 
The Messi family was running out of options. If Lionel’s 
treatment was discontinued, his chances of playing football at 
a decent level would almost certainly be over – he would just be 
too small and frail to compete with his peers, and it was highly 
unlikely that he would ever be able to catch up.
Eventually, Jorge, Celia and Lionel decided together that 
only one course of action was open to them: they would move, 
all of them, to Europe, where they would find a club with a well-
managed youth system and the necessary resources to pay for 
the hormone injections. It was their only choice, especially in 
the aftermath of a deep economic crisis which had wiped away 
the disposable incomes of millions of Argentines.
So they jumped on a plane to Barcelona, where Lionel won 
32 trophies, scored 600 goals and became the greatest player 
in history.
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
20
That simple? No. Far from it. 
Moving to Barcelona, which sounds so easy when it is 
reduced to those mere three words, was an extremely painful 
and complex process on many levels for the whole Messi family. 
It took months to plan, and meant uprooting four children (the 
boys had a younger sister, Maria Sol). It meant Jorge leaving his 
good job as a manager at an engineering firm. It meant Celia 
leaving her beloved extended family. 
The whole thing was an enormous risk for such a young 
boy, even more so because there was no guarantee of a contract, 
treatment or actually anything at all beyond a short trial waiting 
at the other end. 
Through the influential agent Josep Maria Minguella (who 
had also facilitated Diego Maradona’s move to the Camp Nou 
many years earlier), the Messi family had been in touch with 
Barcelona, who were willing to offer a two-week trial after liking 
what they saw on the video tapes of Leo in action. But a trial 
is only a trial, and that is a very long way from a commitment 
to a contract. Lionel was only just 13 years old, still very small, 
and in those days signing any players from overseas was 
extremely unusual even for the biggest of clubs – never mind 
a tiny youngster who needed expensive medical treatment and 
a relocation package for his entire family.
Once the trial started in the summer of 2000, Lionel was 
painfully quiet off the pitch – one of his new team-mates, Cesc 
Fabregas, has since jokingly claimed he initially thought Messi 
was mute – but he was sensational on it, routinely dribbling 
past desperate challenge after desperate challenge to score 
sensational solo goal after sensational solo goal. Very quickly, 
his new team-mates and coaches were won over by his talent.
The decision of actually signing him, though, with all the 
expensive complications that entailed, was not one that anybody 
at the Camp Nou was prepared to take. Finally, the club’s 
technical director Charly Rexach – who missed the first part 
of Messi’s trial because he was attending the Olympic Games 
in Sydney – was convinced. 
After witnessing the little young Argentine score a dazzling 
goal in a practice game on the artificial pitch in the shadow of 
the Camp Nou, Rexach made the commitment the family had 
21
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
been waiting for: Barça would sign Leo, they would pay for his 
treatment, they would provide accommodation for the family 
to live, and they would find a job with a decent salary for Jorge. 
The Messi family, hugely relieved but still very nervous, 
returned to Argentina to prepare for the permanent move, with 
the promise from Rexach that everything would be sorted and 
Lionel would soon be presented with an official contract to 
formally sign for FC Barcelona.
Even then, though, it was far from plain sailing. Rexach 
was confronted by serious internal disagreement from board 
members who were staunchly against making such a big 
financial commitment, breaking all the club’s budgets, to sign 
an under-sized 13-year-old from thousands of miles away on 
the basis of a brief trial. It was weeks rather than days before 
Rexach was finally able to push the deal through, giving more 
sleepless nights to Jorge, who was understandably worried 
that the Spanish club would eventually refuse to honour the 
agreement and the family would be left stranded. 
Things became even harder for Leo when he finally returned 
to Barcelona in February 2001, five months after his initial trial, 
to sign officially and begin his new life in Europe. Firstly, as a 
foreigner, he was only allowed to compete in regional league 
games and mediocre-quality friendlies, severely limiting his 
initial playing time. And then, in just the second of those low-
key matches he was allowed to play, he suffered a broken leg 
– his first serious injury – to force him out of action for the 
rest of the season.
In the meantime, Jorge was still failing to receive the agreed 
financial support from the club, and Leo’s younger sister Maria 
Sol was missing Argentina so badly that in the summer she 
moved back to Rosario with her mother and brothers, leaving 
Lionel and his father alone in Barcelona, splitting the family in 
half across the deep wide ocean.
Leo, very much a vulnerable young teenager, was very 
close to his mother and missed her terribly, with their regular 
phone calls and web chats proving an inadequate replacement 
for seeing her every day. He cried himself to sleep on many 
occasions, and when he woke up his daytime routines were 
complicated by his lack of familiarity with the local Catalan 
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
22
language, further slowing his integration process and making 
him miss the familiar comforts of home even more. 
All things considered, the shy and small Lionel Messi’s 
transition from the innocent happiness of childhood at home 
with his friends and family to a supposedly glamorous new life 
at one of the biggest and best football clubs in the world was 
anything but easy. 
Dream move? At times during those early days, it must have 
felt more like a nightmare.
Talent is not enough
Brendan Rodgers has spent the last two decades helping talented 
young footballers develop into successful senior professionals.
After his own playing days were cut short by a chronic knee 
injury at the age of 20, Rodgers set himself upon a new career 
path by taking a low-level coaching position within the junior 
ranks at Reading. Over the next ten years he gradually climbed 
up the club’s academy coaching ladder before, in 2004, he was 
hand-picked by Jose Mourinho’s assistant Steve Clarke to coach 
the youth team at Chelsea. 
He subsequently moved into senior management with 
Watford, before continuing his career with stints at Reading, 
Swansea, Liverpool and now Celtic.
Even though it’s ten years since he last coached an underage 
team, Rodgers has never forgotten his roots and has always 
placed his trust in youth: at Reading, he launched the careers 
of Gylfi Sigurdsson and Ryan Bertrand; his hat-trick hero 
in Swansea’s Championship play-off final victory (against, 
ironically, Reading) was a young player he had previously worked 
with at Chelsea, Scott Sinclair; Liverpool came agonisingly close 
to winning the Premier League in 2014 with a pair of players 
in their early twenties, John Flanagan and Philippe Coutinho, 
and teenager Raheem Sterling, and Rodgers’ consecutive treble-
winning teams at Celtic have prominently featured young stars 
such as Moussa Dembele, Kieran Tierney, Patrick Roberts and 
Odsonne Edouard.
And after overseeing the progress of several hundred young 
players during the course of his long coaching career, Rodgers 
strongly believes in a simple mantra: talent is not enough.
23
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
‘The first thing you look for in a young player is talent, 
and as a boy Messi clearly had natural talent which could be 
nurtured,’ Rodgers explains in an interview for this book.
‘But there are thousands upon thousands of talents 
throughout the world of football, and if you can’t dedicate 
your life to becoming a player, talent alone eventually won’t be 
enough to make it. To become a successful professional, lots of 
different qualities are also needed. One of the first and most 
important is mental resilience.’
Messi, we have seen from the story of his childhood, 
certainly had that resilience. From the age of ten, he had 
to spend three years administering himself with hormone 
injections every single day. When the money for that treatment 
ran out, Newell’s Old Boys would not pay. River Plate also 
rejected him. Barcelona offered him a trial but took months to 
follow it up with a formal contract. When that eventually came, 
his entire family had to uproot their lives and move 6,000 
miles away from home. He struggled with the local language 
and was slow to integrate with his new team-mates. His sister 
hated Spain so much she moved back home, leaving Lionel in 
a new and strange city with no friends, no mother, no siblings 
and only his father for company.
How easy it would have been, at any stage during that long 
and arduous process, for Messi to have simply given up. To have 
decided that his childish fantasy of becoming a professional 
footballer, which had every chance of coming to nothing 
anyway, wasn’t worth the aggravation to himself or his family. 
To have taken the easy option, refused the injections, stayed 
in Rosario, carried on playing for Newell’s at whatever level he 
happened to reach and settled for that.
But he did not give up. He took each obstacle and setback in 
his stride and carried on. When he was too small, when he had 
to inject himself every day, when he was effectively rejected by 
two clubs in Argentina, when he was kept waiting for months 
by Barcelona, when he was desperately homesick, when he was 
unable to play for his new club, when he was badly injured, 
when he didn’t understand the language in his new city, when 
he was forced to live apart from his mother and his brothers … 
when all those things happened, he just carried on.
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
24
Messi’s mental fortitude during his childhood was really 
quite unconnected from his ability to play football. Yes, he could 
dribble the ball past a row of defenders. Yes, he could shoot with 
deadly accuracy into the bottom corner. But if he hadn’t also 
been able to handle the severe mental demands of suffering 
from a hormone deficiency, moving to a new continent and 
leaving behind his family and friends, those sporting skills 
would not have taken him very far.
In fact, Rodgers believes a wealth of pure talent can even 
prove to be a drawback for young players when they suddenly 
become confronted by how competitive the professional game 
is, and by how much work they will have to undertake if they 
want to enjoy a prolonged career at the top.
‘Lots of players have natural ability,’ he says. ‘But that 
natural ability can sometimes even be a difficulty, especially 
in the modern world of sports science and psychology 
where everything is analysed and natural advantages can be 
challenged. 
‘If you’ve got natural ability and that’s always been your 
greatest strength, it can become a problem because everything 
has always been easy, but then you reach professional level and 
it’s not easy at all. To overcome that, you need to have a capacity 
to learn and grow. How quickly can you learn? If you get a player 
who is naturally gifted but also has a capacity to learn, develop 
and grow, then you’ve got real potential.
‘But if you want to be successful, there’s always a price to 
pay. You have to continually test yourself. You have to make 
sacrifices. With Messi, at a very young age he was moved into 
a new culture, away from his family and friends, and he had to 
devote his life to football in completely new surroundings. Lots 
of young players can’t cope with that, and having that ability to 
persevere when things get difficult is so important.’
Messi was mentally equipped to cope with the various 
challenges he faced, and that – as much as his brilliance with 
the ball at his feet – was an absolutely fundamental aspect of his 
continued development after he made the move to Barcelona. 
He soon flourished in the youth team at La Masia, the 
club’s famed football academy, scoring goals at a rapid rate 
and helping his team, which also included Fabregas and 
25
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
Gerard Pique, win every trophy available. Then he accelerated 
through five different youth teams in the course of just one 
season before, in November 2003, less than three years after 
permanently arriving in Spain, he was given his first-team 
debut by manager Frank Rijkaard as a substitute in a friendly 
against Porto. A competitive debut came the following year, 
then his first goal at senior level (against Albacete in May 2005) 
and then, a few weeks later, the World Youth Championship 
title with Argentina.
The bewildering speed of Messi’s progress during his 
teenage years could fool us into thinking that his advancement 
from youth team football in Argentina to superstardom in 
Barcelona had been a merry and gentle waltz. In reality, as we 
have seen, it had been anything but easy.
And when we see Messi now, scoring goals and winning 
titles, driving luxury cars and living in an ultra-modern 
beachside mansion, earning countless millions and receiving 
daily adulation, it’s easy to fool ourselves into thinking that he 
has an easy life. That he is a lucky man. That he has landed on 
his feet. But before you can land, it’s necessary to jump, and 
one of the main reasons that Messi is now blessed with more 
of the best things that life has to offer is that he has also been 
prepared to endure more of the hardest things that life has to 
offer without complaint and without backing down. 
In the modern world, where social mobility is supposedly 
more fluid than ever before, we are often told to follow our 
dreams and have big ambitions. Impossible is nothing. Just do it. 
Often these emotive rallying cries are little more than 
catchy slogans dreamed up by marketing executives with a 
new product range to sell, but Messi provides evidence that just 
occasionally, if you have the right mentality as well as talent, 
even the grandest of dreams really can come true.
‘Because he was resilient and prepared to persevere, the 
natural talent of Lionel Messi became a working talent,’ says 
Rodgers. ‘And that working talent being applied every day over 
many years made him the genius he is. Don’t get me wrong, 
there’s also lots of natural ability as well. But it’s by being 
a working talent that he’s become the greatest player in the 
history of the game.’
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
26
The passion for success
For Messi, being crowned world champion at youth level in 
2005 was the end of one era, and the beginning of another. 
After that summer, he never again returned to junior 
football. Within a couple of months he was a full international. 
By the end of the season he was a household name, a regular 
in Barcelona’s starting eleven, a European champion and 
preparing to play in another world championship – this time 
the real deal, the World Cup. 
So the triumphant tournament in the Netherlands was the 
end of the journey for Messi as a boy. It was now time for him 
to become a man and continue his ascent towards greatness.
At this point it might appear inevitable that Messi, having 
overcome his growing pains and triumphed at the World Youth 
Championship, would then automatically become a hugely 
successful global superstar, as though the rest of his story was 
predestined and nothing could possibly go wrong.
But that’s not the case at all. Plenty of players are great at 18, 
among the best in the world at that age, but then – for a variety 
of reasons – they fail to progress any further.
Just look at the line-ups from Argentina’s games that 
summer in 2005, starting with his Albiceleste team-mates. 
Some of them, like Sergio Aguero, Pablo Zabaleta, Ezequiel 
Garay and Lucas Biglia, went on to enjoy excellent careers 
at the highest level, continuing to play alongside Messi on a 
regular basis with the senior national team for many years and 
cramming their mantelpieces full of silverware won with an 
array of the biggest clubs in the world.
Not everybody was quite so fortunate. For example, the 
striker who converted Messi’s pass against Spain in the quarter-
final and then kept Aguero out of the starting eleven for the 
final, Gustavo Oberman, never really established himself as a 
top-level professional, playing for several clubs in Argentina 
without any great success and suffering a failed attempt to 
break into Europe with brief spells at Cluj in Romania and 
Cordoba in Spain.
Oscar Ustari, the team’s goalkeeper, ended up spending 
most of his playing days as an understudy at unremarkable 
clubs like Getafe, Almeria and Sunderland, before returning 
27
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
to Argentina to join Newell’s Old Boys and then moving to 
Mexico with Atlas. That’s not a terrible career, by any means, 
but it is well below the heights he might have hoped to hit 
when he accompanied Messi, Aguero and Zabaleta to world 
championship glory back in 2005.
The same pattern is repeated with the other competing 
teams in that tournament. Spain, for example, in addition to 
containing well-known names such as Cesc Fabregas and David 
Silva, were captained by central defender Miquel Robuste, who 
only managed a handful of senior top-flight appearances for 
Levante before seeing his career disappointingly dwindle away 
– he now plays for Badalona, just up the coast from Barcelona, 
in the Spanish third tier.
Brazil’s scorer in the semi-final meeting with Argentina, 
Renato, spent the next few years occasionally representing 
various lower-ranked clubs and was last seen with Sao Caetano 
in the Brazilian second tier before finishing his professional 
career, aged just 28, in 2013. And the Nigeria goalkeeper beaten 
twice by Messi from the penalty spot in the final, Ambruse 
Vanzekin, has passed his career in his home country, mostly 
with Warri Wolves, and never advanced into the senior 
national team.
This might be hard to contemplate, but the same 
underwhelming fate could also have befallen Messi. There was 
nothing inevitable or preordained about the way in which he 
advanced from that summer’s triumph to become the all-time 
leading scorer in Barcelona’s history. 
It could have all gone wrong for him, just as it did for 
Robuste and Renato.
In fact, it is quite striking, looking back now at the footage 
from that tournament, just how much room for improvement 
there was for the teenage Messi.
He had some spectacular moments, of course, including the 
crucial goals and assists against Brazil and Spain described at 
the beginning of this chapter. He was obviously very talented 
and had huge potential. But he also made a lot of mistakes, 
regularly and needlessly conceding possession by running with 
the ball for too long, heading straight into traffic or taking the 
wrong passing option. 
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
28
Back then, in the summer of 2005, he was clearly a very 
good player, and easily recognisable as the elite performer he 
duly matured to become, but there was not always the final 
delivery to go with his dazzling dribbling ability. He was 
nowhere near the finished product, and had some jagged rough 
edges which needed to be smoothed off before he could be 
considered a top-class professional. He might never have made 
that progression at all.
What separates Aguero, Zabaleta, Fabregas and Silva from 
Ustari, Robuste, Renato and Vanzekin? Why were the former 
quartet able to maintain their youthful status among the very 
best players in the world while the latter became relative also-
rans? At the age of 18, all these players were competing at more 
or less the same level. What explains the stark divergence in 
fortunes once they moved into adulthood?
There is no simple or single answer. Many, many things 
can go wrong as a talented teenager treads the precarious 
path towards lasting success: injuries; loss of focus; poor 
management or coaching; bad advice; weak character; lack 
of discipline or temperament and plain bad luck … they 
can all conspire to derail even the most talented of young 
performers.
Celtic boss Brendan Rodgers – whose own playing career 
was ended early by injury – has already identified mental 
resilience and perseverance as key ingredients in the quest 
to convert youthful promise into a successful career, and the 
next quality he pinpoints is that most basic of human qualities: 
passion.
‘Lots of the most successful players I’ve worked with have 
that passion,’ Rodgers says. ‘Two of them are now Messi’s team-
mates, Luis Suarez and Philippe Coutinho. When I worked 
with them at Liverpool, you could clearly see they just loved 
football. They wanted to train every day and play every day and 
they would always be among the last to leave because of their 
love and passion for football. 
‘That passion is so important, especially now in the modern 
game where in many ways it’s become a business. If you can 
retain that passion and pure enthusiasm for the game, even in 
the environment of a business where there’s so much money 
29
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
flying around, that should allow you to do the right things as 
a professional.’
For young players, Rodgers believes that displaying passion 
and commitment both on the pitch and on the training ground 
also carries the additional benefit of earning the respect of the 
squad’s established senior professionals, who do not take kindly 
to the sight of hot prospects from the youth team arriving at 
first-team level with a nonchalant sense of entitlement.
‘When you’re a young player, your aim should be to get in 
with the senior players and show them they can trust you,’ says 
Rodgers. ‘And that trust is not based only upon your talent but 
also upon how hard you’re prepared to work. Messi has always 
been the type of player whose football did his talking and that 
would have made the process easier, just another part of his 
journey.’
Messi’s passion for football, his unadulterated love of 
the game, has always been evident from the almost naïve 
enthusiasm he displays on the pitch, and at professional level 
one of the earliest signs of this quality – proving unequivocally 
to his team-mates and everyone else that he was worthy of 
respect – came in March 2007, when he took a starring role in 
a thrilling Clasico meeting with Real Madrid. 
The two teams had been faltering in recent weeks with 
Madrid winning just one of their last six games and manager 
Fabio Capello consequently rumoured to be on the verge of 
losing his job, while hosts Barça were also under pressure after 
losing two of their previous three games. It was consequently 
expected to be a tight, nervy affair – but instead, Messi, despite 
only being 19 years old, turned it into a Clasico classic.
Ruud van Nistelrooy opened the scoring early on for Madrid, 
but Messi soon levelled by receiving a pass from Samuel Eto’o 
and sliding a precise low shot past Iker Casillas. Almost 
immediately, still with just 12 minutes played, van Nistelrooy 
restored the visitors’ advantage from the penalty spot, only for 
Messi to pounce on a loose ball and fire home, making it 2-2 
before half-time. 
After Barça were reduced to ten men with the dismissal of 
Oleguer Presas, Madrid went ahead for the third time through 
Sergio Ramos’s flicked header from a set piece, but irrepressible 
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
30
teenager Messi would not be denied: in the 91st minute he 
took Ronaldinho’s pass in his stride, surged away from two 
defenders and thrashed a powerful strike past Casillas, before 
racing away in a frantic shirt-tugging, badge-kissing, shouting 
and screaming celebration which made it clear just how much 
the goal had meant to him.
That hat-trick in March 2007 showed that Messi, at the age 
of 19, was very much on the right track. He had the talent. He 
had the resilience and the perseverance. He had the passion 
and the willingness to work hard. 
All the ingredients were coming together, but there were 
still more challenges to overcome.
From always injured to always available
An important side note to that Clasico hat-trick was that, even 
though the game came two and a half years after Messi’s 
competitive first-team debut, it was the first time he had ever 
played against Real Madrid at the Camp Nou.
This was because the early years of his career were blighted 
by a series of injuries, mainly muscle strains with Messi 
struggling to grow into his body as he developed from a boy 
into a man – not helped by his poor diet, which featured an 
excess of junk food and not enough fruit and vegetables.
The regular recurrence of these relatively minor but 
frustrating injury absences was a warning sign for Messi: if 
he had allowed them to continue, he risked seriously testing 
the patience of Barcelona’s fans, directors and coaches, who 
would have been very reluctant to hand out lucrative new 
contracts or give a more prominent playing role to a youngster 
who was nearly always injured, no matter how much talent 
he had.
Fortunately, Messi and his advisors were sharp enough to 
recognise the dangers and he took the necessary action, putting 
himself on a strict new diet and devising a tailored training 
programmes to look after his injury-prone muscles, and the 
apparent fragility of his youth has now been long forgotten: 
since 2008 he has never played less than 30 league games 
in a season, and he has made at least 50 appearances in all 
competitions in eight of the last ten campaigns.
31
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
Brendan Rodgers believes this durability, which has arisen 
from self-imposed discipline, is another key to Messi’s success, 
saying: ‘His availability has been remarkable.
‘To achieve everything that he’s achieved, and score the 
number of goals he’s scored, he’s had to be available to play 50 
or 60 games a season every year for ten years. To do that you 
need to be at the top level of your fitness, and look after yourself 
in every aspect of your lifestyle. 
‘I’ve worked with some players who I believed were going 
to be top players but they could never find that availability, and 
with Messi it’s very clear that he looks after himself in order to 
be available to play every week.’
Although he is too discreet and polite to name names 
or point fingers, one of the gifted players who worked with 
Rodgers but failed to always be available – and perhaps the 
starkest example of sadly squandered talent among Messi’s 
contemporaries – is Mario Balotelli.
During his teenage years with Inter Milan, Balotelli was a 
genuine sensation. In 2008, at the age of 17, he scored twice to 
knock Juventus out of the Coppa Italia, prompting the website 
sportslens.com to gush: ‘His touch and technique [are] already 
reminiscent of the greats of football history.’ Later that year he 
became Inter’s youngest ever scorer in the Champions League, 
and the club’s president Massimo Moratti raved: ‘The quality he 
has you cannot ignore and we must support him to the fullest.’
Inter’s next manager Jose Mourinho – never noted for his 
ability to develop young players – did not fully agree with that 
sentiment, and after a series of disciplinary issues Balotelli 
was allowed to join Manchester City for £22.5m (a substantial 
sum in those days) in the summer of 2010, reuniting with his 
first professional manager Roberto Mancini. Balotelli was still 
only 20 years old, and this was his second chance to blossom 
into an elite performer – a possibility underlined when he was 
given the 2010 Golden Boy award for the best young player in 
the world, previously presented to Messi in 2005.
At first, there were hopeful signs that Balotelli would eagerly 
seize his latest opportunity as he quickly became a fixture in 
ambitious City’s starting eleven and finished his first season 
in England by being named man of the match in the 1-0 FA 
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
32
Cup Final victory over Stoke, playing a key role as his club won 
their first trophy in 35 years. 
The following season also contained some memorable 
highlights, including two goals and a fabulous performance 
in an era-defining 6-1 victory over Manchester United at Old 
Trafford, and an assist to Aguero for the dramatic title-winning 
goal in the final minute of the final day of the Premier League 
campaign against Queens Park Rangers.
But his disciplinary problems persisted, and midway through 
the following season City’s patience – just as Inter’s had a couple 
of years previously – finally ran out. Balotelli returned to Italy 
with AC Milan, where the same cycle repeated itself: occasional 
flashes of brilliance overshadowed by a lack of discipline and 
inconsistent performances. A poor season under Rodgers in 
Liverpool was followed by a poor season back with Milan, and 
Balotelli, now 28 at the time of writing, has spent the last couple 
of years attempting to revive his career in France with Nice.
Balotelli’s talent has never been in doubt. When he was 18, 
it could be argued that he was better than Messi had been at 
the same age. Even now, at his best he is unplayable. But his 
best has only been evident on rare occasions, and one of his 
greatest weaknesses has been his lack of availability: seven of 
his 12 professional seasons have seen him make less than 30 
appearances in all competitions.
Balotelli is enjoying a good career as a top-flight player. 
He will earn many millions, win a few trophies and could yet 
resurrect his international career after recently being recalled 
by Italy for the first time in four years. But with his boundless 
talent he could have been a world-beater, one of the very best 
of his generation – perhaps even as good as Messi. The reason 
he so far has failed to do so has nothing to do with his ability, 
and everything to do with his application. 
And his story is a stern reminder that world class at the age 
of 18 does not necessarily mean world class at the age of 28. The 
road to success is tough; staying on it is even tougher.
Ronaldinho’s example to follow … and avoid
Early in his professional career, Messi was given a close-
up lesson about exactly what can happen if the necessary 
33
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
commitment to continued excellence is not sustained, with a 
high-profile team-mate swerving off the path in spectacular 
and tragic fashion.
When Messi progressed into the senior team, the undisputed 
king of the Camp Nou was Ronaldinho. The flamboyant 
Brazilian was a World Cup winner with Brazil in 2002, joined 
Barça from Paris St Germain a year later and proceeded to thrill 
and astound fans on a weekly basis with his joyfully audacious 
and endlessly inventive play. 
Ronaldinho was at the peak of his powers, widely regarded 
as the best attacking player in the world – certainly the most 
thrilling – and he won the Ballon d’Or award by a landslide in 
2005. He even earned the rarity of a standing ovation from Real 
Madrid fans after delivering a particularly astonishing two-goal 
display in Barcelona’s 3-0 victory at the Bernabeu in November 
2005 (a game which also marked Messi’s Clasico debut).
Happily for Messi, Ronaldinho was also a commendably 
generous and open-hearted individual, who welcomed the 
young Argentine into the fold with open arms. Rather than 
jealously regarding him as a potential rival and usurper, 
the Brazilian superstar saw Messi as a little brother and 
did everything he could to make him feel comfortable, best 
illustrated when he brilliantly set up the teenager for his first 
goal at senior level against Albacete in May 2005 and then 
paraded him to the impressed crowd by lifting him high upon 
his shoulders – a touching gesture which also, with hindsight, 
became heavily symbolic.
Ronaldinho’s arrival in Barcelona in 2003 had sparked a 
serious upturn in fortunes for the Catalan club, injecting a 
much-needed sense of optimism after a fallow few years, and 
he is still very much regarded as a hero figure by fans (many 
of whom, with a hint of embarrassed guilt, will quietly confide 
– when they’re sure that nobody else is listening – that Messi 
might be the better player of the two, but that Ronaldinho was 
more exciting).
With Samuel Eto’o and Deco playing key supporting 
roles in the attacking positions, Frank Rijkaard steadying the 
ship from the sidelines and Messi’s rich potential starting 
to unfold, Ronaldinho inspired Barcelona to consecutive La 
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
34
Liga title triumphs in 2005 and 2006, as well as the second 
Champions League crown in the club’s history in 2006. He 
looked untouchable.
But then, just as he reached the summit, came the fall. 
The problem was that Ronaldinho lived his life in the same 
way that he played his football: with a smile on his face, full of 
energy, full of exuberance, and above all else just wanting to 
enjoy himself. Reports started to circulate that he was spending 
more and more time in the nightclubs of Barcelona with a 
wide selection of the region’s finest-looking ladies, sometimes 
arriving for training in such a bad state that he fell asleep in the 
changing room and couldn’t take part in the session. 
Inevitably, Ronaldinho started to lose his physical shape, 
and his performances dipped. He was still conjuring moments 
of magic, but they became less frequent, and his lack of 
professionalism also prompted rumours of divisions within 
the squad as some players became increasingly frustrated that 
their star man was not pulling his (rapidly growing) weight.
Ronaldinho could not regain his peak form, and in the 
summer of 2008 the club decided enough was enough: he was 
promptly sold to AC Milan. At the time it was a controversial 
decision but it was proven to be the correct one, with Ronaldinho 
never again returning to his best and only becoming a partial 
success during his three years in Italy, before returning to 
Brazil to while away the remainder of his career with a series 
of clubs in his homeland, occasionally winning trophies and 
scoring spectacular goals but never recapturing the form which 
had made him such a glorious sight between 2002 and 2006.
Watching Ronaldinho’s descent very carefully was a young 
and impressionable Lionel Messi, who hugely admired the 
charismatic Brazilian during his early days in the senior squad 
and soon became a friend as well as a team-mate, joining 
Ronaldinho, Deco and Sylvinho at the ‘Brazilian table’ in the 
club’s dining room and gratefully allowing himself to be taken 
under the superstar’s wing.
This was a key time in both Messi’s career and his life. 
He was 17 when Ronaldinho created his first goal and hoisted 
him high upon his shoulders in that game against Albacete; 
he had just turned 21 when, a little more than three years later, 
35
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
the Brazilian was sold. During that crucial period, Messi was 
leaving behind his childhood and entering adulthood. He was 
becoming a man, and also becoming a highly paid, hugely 
admired megastar footballer – with all the tempting off-the-
pitch opportunities that entails. He also knew exactly how 
those opportunities could have been exploited, because he saw 
Ronaldinho do it nearly every night. 
The high life, the good times, the glitz and glamour, the 
extra-curricular entertainment … they were all opening up in 
front of Messi, who could have very easily taken advantage of a 
first-rate guide into this new and beguiling lifestyle in the form 
of his team-mate and friend.
If Messi had allowed Ronaldinho to become his mentor 
off the pitch as well as on the field of play, his story could have 
taken a very different path. He could, perhaps, have taken his 
eye off the ball to the extent that he became another version 
of Mario Balotelli, failing to fulfil his endless potential and 
instead spending more time enjoying his wealth and fame and 
everything they can offer to a young man who allows himself to 
be dazzled by the bright city lights on the sunny Mediterranean 
coast. He could have chosen fun over football, hijinks over high 
achievement, bedpost trophies over football trophies, the easy 
life over hard work. 
Many people, in the same situation, would have done exactly 
that. How easy it would have been for such a young, naïve and 
inexperienced young man to start flashing his newly-earned 
cash, joining Ronaldinho in carousing until sunrise and 
neglecting to continue to do the things that had taken him to 
the top in the first place.
That would have been even easier for Messi due to the 
regular injuries, as mentioned earlier, he suffered during this 
period, restricting his availability for first-team action but 
increasing his availability for nightclub action.
Instead, though, he took the opposite course to Ronaldinho. 
Rather than yielding to temptation, he made even more 
sacrifices. He worked harder than ever to regain his fitness 
and didn’t allow his head to be turned – he remained, and still 
is, a quiet, stay-at-home kind of guy, reserving his energies 
for training and playing rather than dancing vertically and 
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
36
horizontally in the nightclubs of Barcelona. He did everything 
that Ronaldinho didn’t, setting himself up for a career of 
incredible durability rather than becoming a flame that shone 
brilliantly but quickly burned out. 
In addition to Messi’s mental fortitude, Brendan Rodgers 
believes the young Argentine was able to avoid following the 
example of Ronaldinho, whose decline was played out in vivid 
detail right in front of his eyes, in significant part thanks to 
the values he had been immersed in during his time with the 
club’s youth team programme.
‘Sometimes the greatest inspiration you can be given is 
when you have an example of what not to do,’ emphasises the 
Celtic boss.
‘When he came into the first team, Messi will have looked 
at Ronaldinho as an incredible talent and been inspired by 
him because, in those few years when he was at his absolute 
peak, Ronaldinho was the best player in the world, no doubt 
about it. 
‘But Messi was given an education by Barça, and by the 
time he reached the first team those values and principles were 
in place. That culture was all about humility and respect, not 
just for others but for themselves as well. And if you look at 
the generation of players who came through that culture at 
La Masia – people like Xavi, Iniesta, Busquets – they all have 
those qualities.’
Ronaldinho, with his increasing fondness for the excesses 
of life, was threatening to undermine that culture just as Messi 
was ready to explode towards greatness. So he had to go. And 
the differing directions their careers followed after they were 
separated in 2008 makes it clear that if you want to be the best 
and continue to be the best, it’s necessary to make sacrifices. If 
you want to bask in the bright glow of the candle at both ends, 
sooner or later you’ll end up getting burned.
Messi vs Ronaldo: the greatest rivalry?
Here is a rather obvious statement: if you want to be the best, 
you have to be better than everyone else. And if one of your 
competitors is very, very good indeed, you have no choice but 
to be even better.
37
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
By the summer of 2009, just a year after Ronaldinho’s 
departure, Lionel Messi was already being widely lauded 
as the best player in the world having played a starring role 
in Barcelona’s historic treble at the end of Pep Guardiola’s 
spectacular first season in charge, including a brilliant headed 
goal in the Champions League Final victory over Manchester 
United in Rome.
That same summer, Real Madrid smashed the world 
transfer record by signing a player who was intended to provide 
some serious rivalry to Messi both on the pitch in terms of goals 
scored and trophies won, and off the pitch in terms of individual 
accolades and global marketing power.
And so was born one of the greatest rivalries in the history 
of sport: Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo.
Ronaldo was already a bona fide superstar when he was 
recruited by Madrid for £80m from Manchester United. 
Fittingly, his last game for the Red Devils had been that 
Champions League Final against Barça, where he dazzled in 
the early stages and repeatedly came close to netting the opener 
before a goal from Samuel Eto’o changed the complexion of the 
contest and allowed Messi and co to take over.
The Portuguese star had already won one Champions 
League crown, overcoming Chelsea in rain-sodden Moscow 
the previous year, and had just helped United to their third 
consecutive Premier League title, during which time he blasted 
home 91 goals in all competitions – 20 more than Messi in the 
same time frame.
What they have both achieved since then is truly mind-
boggling.
By the end of the 2017/18 season, when he left Madrid to 
join Juventus, Ronaldo had scored 450 goals in Spain to surpass 
the Bernabeu club’s previous record holder, Raul, who mustered 
a mere 323.
Messi, meanwhile, had plundered no less than 552 
competitive goals for Barcelona, more than doubling the 
amount registered by the club’s second-highest scorer, Cesar 
Rodriguez Alvarez (232).
And that’s just the start of it. The outlandish figures 
recorded by these two intergalactic superhuman superheroes 
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
38
just keep on dripping off the page (stats accurate to the end of 
the World Cup). Between them, they have scored 694 league 
goals alone since Ronaldo’s move to Spain in 2009. They have 
both scored at least 40 goals in every single season since 2010, 
a feat which earned gushing praise and awards galore for 
Mohamed Salah when he did it just once. 
Messi has scored 30 hat-tricks in La Liga; only Ronaldo 
has more with 34. They have won five Ballon d’Or awards 
each, exercising an absolute duopoly over the honour for a 
decade. They are both the leading scorers for their respective 
countries: Messi with 65 goals for Argentina, Ronaldo with 84 
for Portugal. They are the top two scorers in Champions League 
history, Ronaldo on 120 and Messi with 100, streets ahead of 
third-placed Raul (71).
The problem we have, sitting in the middle of all these 
outrageous accomplishments, is that statistics like those have 
become so well known and comfortably familiar we have started 
to take them for granted. Messi scored 45 goals last season? 
Well, that’s below his usual standard. Ronaldo netted 15 in the 
Champions League? Of course he did. 
Their goalscoring feats have become normalised, when 
really they are not normal at all. In the history of football, they 
are completely abnormal.
So let’s step back for a moment, and get some perspective 
on what these two players have done over the last decade.
Barcelona and Real Madrid are two of the wealthiest, most 
prestigious and most demanding clubs in sport. They have won 
honours galore and their list of famous former forwards reads 
like a roll call of all-time greats: Alfredo Di Stefano, Ferenc 
Puskas, Johan Cruyff, Diego Maradona, Raul, Romario, Ronaldo 
Nazario, Ronaldinho … these two mega-giants of the global 
sporting landscape have always been heavyweight contenders, 
and they have always boasted a plethora of world-class talent.
But over the last few years they have simultaneously 
possessed players who set new goalscoring records at such a 
dizzying pace it’s not even a contest: Messi has recorded 320 
more goals (and counting) than anyone else who has ever played 
for Barcelona; the iconic Hugo Sanchez didn’t even manage 
half the total that Ronaldo plundered for Madrid. These are 
39
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
astronomical achievements amid some serious competition, 
and the fact that neither of them have suffered a single bad 
season, and neither of them have slowed down since they 
turned 30, makes it even more incredible.
Being granted the opportunity to watch just one of Messi 
or Ronaldo would be special enough, yet for nine years before 
Ronaldo’s move to Juventus we had the pleasure of watching 
both of them in the same league at the same time. Real Madrid 
and Barcelona both boasting players who obliterate all their 
club’s scoring records by averaging a goal per game for nearly 
a decade has never happened before, and it will never happen 
again. 
Messi very much had the better of their early exchanges, 
claiming that Champions League victory over United in 
2009, playing a starring role in the famous ‘Manita’ victory 
in 2010 (see Chapter Four), netting twice at the Bernabeu in 
a Champions League semi-final in 2011 (see Chapter Three) 
and winning La Liga three years in a row. During that period, 
Ronaldo’s only significant scalp was a cup-clinching headed 
goal in the Copa Del Rey Final in 2010, and Messi’s haul of 
four straight Ballon d’Or awards between 2009 and 2012 
emphasised the gap between them.
Slowly, though, Ronaldo then started to claw back some 
of the lost ground, and their personal battle soon reached a 
dazzling crescendo which has somehow been maintained 
ever since.
The rivalry was perhaps best encapsulated in a Camp Nou 
Clasico in October 2012. Ronaldo struck first when he received 
a pass from Karim Benzema and beat Victor Valdes with a low 
shot inside the near post; Messi responded by latching on to a 
loose ball in the box to fire home; then Messi conjured more 
magic with a spectacular 25-yard free kick into the top right 
corner, only for Ronaldo to answer back with a crisp finish 
from Mesut Ozil’s through ball. The game finished Barcelona 
2-2 Real Madrid, Messi 2-2 Ronaldo, summing up both their 
incredible individual achievements and their unstoppable thirst 
for goals.
In the last five years, it has been more or less honours even in 
terms of trophies. Messi has been on top domestically, winning 
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
40
four more league titles to Ronaldo’s one, but the Portuguese has 
dominated in Europe with four Champions League crowns to 
Messi’s one, also registering the three highest-scoring seasons 
in the competition’s history. Ronaldo has also tasted triumph 
on the international stage, winning Euro 2016 with Portugal 
(even though he was off the pitch, injured, when it happened) 
to eclipse Messi’s three losing finals with Argentina.
Without wishing to enter the debate about which of the 
two players is better, it’s clear that both of them have produced 
almost unheard-of levels of consistency for a very long period 
and, although this can only ever be a hypothetical discussion, 
it’s interesting to consider whether Messi or Ronaldo would 
have been able to sustain such outrageous rates of productivity 
without one key factor: each other.
Their personal relationship is, by all accounts, distant but 
respectful. There’s none of the malice or bitterness that tabloid 
sections of the media would sometimes like us to believe, and 
Messi has repeatedly stated that he does not regard himself 
and Ronaldo as rivals – he is only focussed on winning 
team trophies, he claims, and has no interest whatsoever in 
the media-hyped individual battle between himself and the 
Portuguese star.
But is that completely true? Although (as we will discuss in 
detail in a later chapter) Messi is very much a team player who 
is prepared to sacrifice individual ambitions for the good of the 
group, in the ultra-competitive world of elite sport it’s difficult 
to imagine that Ronaldo’s presence in Madrid for nine years 
had absolutely zero motivational impact.
Of course, Messi and Ronaldo would have both reached 
extremely high levels of performance if the other one didn’t exist 
(there was no Ronaldo to inspire Messi on the playing fields 
of Rosario, or during the 2005 World Youth Championship, or 
during his Clasico hat-trick in 2007), but from Michelangelo 
and Leonardo Da Vinci to Taylor Swift and Katy Perry, history 
is full of examples of high achievers who have used personal 
rivalries as fuel for their own competitive juices. Simply stated, 
it’s self-evident that if Messi wants to be the best player in the 
world, for the last decade that has necessarily entailed being 
better than Ronaldo.
41
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
The extent to which Messi and Ronaldo have inspired 
each other is an interesting if ultimately unprovable debate, 
but Brendan Rodgers believes internal aspirations rather 
than external rivalries have been more important in their 
astronomical achievements.
‘I think we’re fortunate that we’ve had two of the greatest 
players in the history of the game playing beside each other for 
so long, but I’m not sure how much they’ve influenced each 
other,’ he says.
‘Maybe subconsciously in some ways they’ve driven each 
other on, but I think both those players inherently have that 
hunger to be the very best players they can be. With the very 
elite performers, that drive comes from within.
‘If you look at Messi, of course he’s always been playing in a 
top quality team in a system that he knows so well, but he has 
still had this inner desire and hunger to keep on improving. 
And there’s also a lot of humility – it clearly doesn’t matter to 
him what he’s already achieved, he still has the same desire 
and humility to know that he has to keep on working hard and 
practising.’
As we can’t inhabit their brains, we will never know for sure 
– and perhaps neither will the players themselves – whether 
Messi and Ronaldo would have been quite so good without the 
other one. But perhaps rather than competing with each other 
as it has often been assumed, they have really been engaged in 
an even more intense battle: competing with themselves.
Dead-ball king … eventually
One of the main reasons that Messi and Ronaldo have enjoyed 
such incredible longevity has been their ability to find ways 
of getting better with every passing year. Even as their bodies 
have inevitably slowed down, they have adapted to the passage 
of time and remained just as effective as ever, if not more so. 
For a specific example of Messi’s relentless quest for self-
improvement, we can consider the remarkable transformation 
he has effected in his ability to score from set pieces.
It’s surprising to learn that during his early days at Barcel­
ona, he was not particularly good at free kicks and, in any case, 
he very rarely had the chance to take any because ownership 
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
42
of those duties belonged well and truly to the masterful 
Ronaldinho.
As England fans will ruefully remember from the 2002 
World Cup quarter-final, the Brazilian was a sublime dead-ball 
expert, capable of curling, caressing or thrashing the ball into 
the net from practically any angle or distance. Over the course 
of his career he netted 66 free-kick goals, and it’s striking just 
how varied they were – the top-right corner was Ronaldinho’s 
favoured destination, but he could and did put them anywhere.
So Messi didn’t really have much chance to start taking free 
kicks until after Ronaldinho left the Camp Nou in the summer 
of 2008, and he didn’t need long to net his first: a cheeky, 
quickly taken effort before the wall had been set in a home win 
over Atletico Madrid two months into the new season.
At this stage, however, Messi’s goals from set pieces initially 
only came in a slow trickle, and he was by no means a dead-
ball specialist. It was only in 2009 – five years after his senior 
career got underway – that he started to improve his output, 
and that was partly thanks to advice he received from Diego 
Maradona during the former World Cup-winning captain’s 
spell as Argentina manager.
According to Fernando Signorini, the national team’s 
fitness coach at the time who was later interviewed by Spanish 
television channel La Sexta, during one training session Messi 
took three consecutive poor free kicks and started to walk away 
in frustration when Maradona accosted him. The old master 
put his arm around Messi and told him to try a few more, and 
to allow his foot to linger on the ball for a fraction of a second 
longer when he made contact, otherwise ‘the ball won’t know 
what you want it to do’.
Implementing that advice by committing himself to a lot 
of practice – which he continues on an almost daily basis – 
Messi transformed his free-kick-taking abilities beyond all 
recognition, and he is now one of the most prolific dead-ball 
experts in history: in the 2017/18 season he scored six goals 
from set pieces to equal a Spanish league record set 11 years 
earlier by … guess who? ... Ronaldinho.
Like Ronaldinho, Messi has developed a wide repertoire 
of set pieces and can score anywhere the opposing defensive 
43
THE PRICE OF SUCCESS
wall and goalkeeper happen to leave him with an opening. 
In the spring of 2018, for example, he netted free kicks in 
three consecutive games: the first, against Girona, was craftily 
drilled under the wall into the bottom left corner; the next at 
Las Palmas was a rocket into the top left corner; and then he 
defeated second-placed Atletico Madrid – effectively sealing 
the league title – with a wickedly dipping missile into the top 
right corner.
Interestingly, the inventive ‘under-the-wall’ free kick that 
Messi pulled out of the bag against Girona was a trick he had 
previously executed in a World Cup qualifying victory over 
Uruguay nearly six years earlier. But even then the idea wasn’t 
original. In fact, he had stolen it from a former team-mate: 
in 2006, Messi was present in person to witness a free kick 
being rifled low under the wall during Barcelona’s Champions 
League meeting with Werder Bremen. The taker? Ronaldinho, 
of course. The apprentice had learned from the master, in order 
to eventually overtake him.
This determination to learn and keep on improving is one 
of the keys to Messi’s greatness, and perhaps the single most 
important key to his astonishing consistency and durability – 
and one of the greatest lessons he can teach us: you are never 
too good or too old to improve.
By the time he received Maradona’s set-piece-taking advice 
in 2009, he was already the best player in the world, and we 
have already seen how much hard work had been necessary to 
propel him to that lofty status. 
Even then, though, despite all the plaudits and tributes he 
was being showered with on a daily basis, Messi still didn’t 
think he had reached the summit of his potential. He was 
still humble enough to remain receptive to new ideas, and the 
improvement in his free-kick technique effected by Maradona, 
along with the adoption of specific tricks of the trade such as 
Ronaldinho’s under-the-wall creation, meant he was able to 
do something which didn’t really seem possible but always 
is, whoever you are and however good you are: he became 
even better.
But we are now ready to discover that no matter how much 
determination, passion and commitment Messi has devoted to 
LIONEL MESSI AND THE ART OF LIVING
44
the challenge of making himself the best footballer he could 
possibly become, he will never be perfect. 
Even the best dead-ball experts can’t score from every free-
kick, and sometimes the most important moments of them all 
result in heart-wrenching failure.
