 
 
Michael Jackson 
 
Biography  
• 
Occupation: Singer 
• 
Born: August 29, 1958 in Gary, Indiana 
• 
Died: June 25, 2009 in Los Angeles, California 
• 
Best known for: Thriller, the best-selling album in history 
• 
Nickname: King of Pop 
 
Biography:  
 
Michael Jackson 
by Jack Kightlinger 
Where was Michael Jackson born?  
 
Michael Jackson was born in Gary, Indiana on August 19, 1958. Michael's father, Joe 
Jackson, worked as a crane operator at a steel mill. His mother, Katherine, took care of the 
family and sometimes took part time jobs. Both of Michael's parents loved music. His dad 
played guitar for an R & B band and his mother sang and played the piano. Growing up, all of 
the Jackson children were encouraged to study music.  
 
The Jackson Family  
 
Michael grew up in a large family. He had five brothers (Jackie, Tito, Jermaine, Marlon, and 
Randy) and three sisters (Rebbie, La Toya, and Janet). Michael was the third youngest with 
Randy and Janet both being younger. The Jacksons were fairly poor and lived in a small 
house with just two bedrooms for eleven people.  
 
A Strict Father  
 
 
 
Joe Jackson was a very strict father. He didn't allow the kids to have a lot of friends and he 
often whipped the children if they disobeyed. He wanted them to stay out of trouble and away 
from gangs. Later, when the Jackson 5 was still getting started, Joe would push the boys to 
practice for hours. He would hit them or verbally abuse them if they made a mistake.  
 
A Young Singer  
 
The three older brothers (Jackie, Tito, and Jermaine) formed a band called the Jackson 
Brothers. Michael and his brother Marlon joined the band in 1964. Soon, the family realized 
that Michael was a gifted singer and dancer. At just eight years old, Michael began to sing 
lead vocals along with his older brother Jermaine.  
 
The Jackson 5  
 
Joe Jackson realized that his children were very talented. He felt that they could become 
successful in music. They changed the name of the band to the Jackson 5 and began playing 
all around town. Then they began touring the Midwest where they played in bars and clubs. 
They won several talent shows and began to gain a name for themselves.  
 
Michael (center) singing with the Jackson 5  
Source: CBS Television 
 
In 1968, the Jackson 5 signed a record contract with Motown Records. Their first album, 
Diana Ross Presents the Jackson 5, reached #1 on the R & B chart and #5 on the Pop Albums 
Chart. Michael sang lead vocals on their first single, "I Want You Back", which hit number 1 
on the Billboard Hot 100.  
 
Fame  
 
The Jackson 5 continued to have success. They released more number one singles like "ABC", 
"I'll Be There", and "The Love You Save." As the lead singer, Michael was becoming very 
famous. He couldn't go to school because he would be mobbed by fans, so he was taught by 
private tutors in between rehearsals and concerts. Michael was just a kid when all this 
happened. He didn't get to play with other kids his age and later felt like he missed out on 
having a childhood.  
 
Michael Begins a Solo Career  
 
 
 
While still singing with the Jackson 5, Michael had a number of solo albums. At first his solo 
career didn't take off, but he did have a few hit songs including "Ben" and "Got to Be There." 
However, in 1978 Michael met music producer Quincy Jones while working on the set of the 
movie The Wiz. He broke away from the family band and worked on his first "grown up" 
album. In 1979, Michael released the album Off the Wall. It was a huge hit and had four top 
ten songs including the number one singles "Rock with You" and "Don't Stop 'til You Get 
Enough." Michael was now one of the biggest stars in music.  
 
Thriller  
 
Michael wanted to follow up Off the Wall with an even bigger album. This was going to be 
quite the task. He worked with Quincy Jones again and in late 1982 released the album 
Thriller. The album was a huge success. It had seven top ten singles and won eight Grammy 
awards. Eventually, Thriller would become the best selling album of all time. Michael had 
now become the biggest star in the music industry.  
 
In addition to the music on Thriller, Michael also broke new ground with his music videos. 
Up until that time, most music videos just showed the band or singer performing the song. 
Michael wanted to create a story with his videos. These new types of music videos became 
very popular and changed the way music videos were made. The most famous of his videos 
was a 13 minute long video for the album's title song Thriller. It was later voted as the most 
influential music video of all time.  
 
Later Career  
 
Although Michael's career peaked with the Thriller album, he released several more 
successful albums including Bad (1987), Dangerous (1991), HIStory: Past, Present and 
Future, Book I (1995), and Invincible (2001).  
 
Private Life  
 
Michael Jackson led an interesting, if somewhat strange, private life. He lived in a large 
complex he named Neverland Ranch, after the land where fictional character Peter Pan lived. 
Neverland was part home, part amusement park. The ranch had a petting zoo, railroads, and 
rides such as a Ferris wheel, roller coaster, bumper cards, and a carousel.  
 
Michael was married twice. His first marriage was to Lisa Marie Presley, daughter of the 
famous rock singer Elvis Presley. His second marriage was to a nursing assistant named 
Debbie Rowe. He had two children, Michael Joseph Jackson and Paris-Michael Katherine 
Jackson, with Debbie before they were divorced. Michael also had a third child, Prince 
Michael Jackson II, but the mother's identity is unknown.  
 
Changing Appearance  
 
Michael was also famous for changing his appearance. Over the years his nose became 
thinner, his face changed shape, and his skin tone became lighter. Some people think that he 
did not like his appearance because of his abuse from his father at a young age. There is also 
some debate as to how his skin tone changed. Regardless, he looked considerably different as 
the years passed.  
 
 
 
Death  
 
Michael died of a heart attack on June 25, 2009. He was fifty years old. The heart attack was 
likely caused by drugs he was taking to help him sleep.  
 
Interesting Facts about Michael Jackson  
• 
He was the best selling artist in the United States for 2009, the year of his death. 
Around 35 million of his albums were sold worldwide in the 12 months after he died. 
• 
He had two pet llamas on his ranch called Lola and Louis. 
• 
The album Thriller was number one on the Billboard Chart for 37 weeks. 
• 
He purchased the rights to the Beetles catalogue in 1985 for $47 million. 
• 
His skin doctor said that his skin tone changed because he had a disease called vitiligo. 
• 
He was burned when his hair caught fire during the filming of a Pepsi commercial. 
 
